HOLON4TH Version 4.0
====================

HOLON4TH is a new interactive integrated cross-development and 
debugging environment (IIDE) for Forth programs. HOLON4TH runs 
under DOS and creates DOS target programs.

HOLON4TH features:

1. A user interface as a browser, which offers a constant view 
of the program under development. The program is edited, 
restructured, loaded, tested and debugged in the browser. 

2. A new way to handle the source text. HOLON4TH orders the 
program into a hierarchical structure of modules, groups, and 
words, which are presented in three list windows at the top of 
the browser. The text of the current word is displayed in a 
central window, ready for editing. The program is as readable 
as a book, you can go directly to every word and look up 
definitions with hypertext. An import/export mechanism allows 
the reuse of modules and the management of program libraries.

3. Interactive umbilical development on a target program that 
is running on a separate PC, or alternatively, in a separate 
DOS window under a multitasking operating system. 

4. An instant edit-test cycle. If you change the text of a 
program word, only this word is reloaded, and its code is 
automatically substituted in the target program. The state of 
the program remains intact and you can continue testing 
immediately.
 
5. Automatic code stripping. The target program only contains 
the code that is really used.

You are welcome to try out these and other new features. 
HOLON4TH is a fully functional freeware development system. Use 
it to build DOS applications that contain up to 1000 Forth 
words. HOLON4TH is also well suited system for learning Forth. 
You will enjoy the clear presentation of the source text and 
the immediacy of action.

For additional information contact

Wolf Wejgaard
Forth Engineering               Tel. +41-41-377-3774
Neuhoflirain 10                 Fax. +41-41-377-4774
6045 Meggen, Switzerland        wejgaard@access.ch



