{\rtf1\mac\deff2 {\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss Chicago;}{\f2\froman New York;}{\f3\fswiss Geneva;}{\f4\fmodern Monaco;}{\f6\fdecor London;}{\f11\fnil Cairo;}{\f13\fnil Zapf Dingbats;}{\f14\fnil Bookman;}{\f15\fnil N Helvetica Narrow;}{\f16\fnil Palatino;}{\f18\fnil Zapf Chancery;}{\f20\froman Times;}{\f21\fswiss Helvetica;}{\f22\fmodern Courier;}{\f23\ftech Symbol;}{\f33\fnil Avant Garde;}{\f34\fnil New Century Schlbk;}{\f128\fnil Boston IIx;}{\f192\fnil Mangia;}{\f220\fnil MiniBoston IIx;}{\f221\fnil MicroBoston IIx;}{\f222\fnil Line & Lead;}{\f1024\fnil American Heritage;}{\f1025\fnil ClosedCaption2;}{\f1026\fnil XPGildedCD-IN;}{\f1133\fnil Century Cond;}{\f1148\fnil XPCompacta;}{\f1202\fnil XPOxfordText-Normal;}{\f1238\fnil XPCopperhead;}{\f1269\fnil Futena;}{\f1397\fnil XPCabotOpen;}{\f1639\fnil XPRadial;}{\f1792\fnil Lucida Bright;}{\f2000\fnil Garamond Narrow;}{\f2007\fnil Delphian;}{\f2017\fnil Lubalin Graph;}{\f2024\fnil Machine;}{\f2029\fnil Nadianne;}{\f2036\fnil Old English Text;}{\f2038\fnil Onyx;}{\f2040\fnil Oxford;}{\f2046\fnil Swing;}{\f2052\fnil Zeal;}{\f2091\fnil Cursive-Elegant;}{\f2096\fnil XPKaleph-Bold;}{\f2121\fnil Garamond;}{\f2247\fnil XPGildedCD;}{\f2385\fnil XPJasmine;}{\f2429\fnil XPSchooner;}{\f2435\fnil Fruit;}{\f2490\fnil DeltaSymbol;}{\f2503\fnil Technical;}{\f2515\fnil MT Extra;}{\f2686\fnil Caslon;}{\f2689\fnil Trade Condensed;}{\f2799\fnil XPTechno;}{\f2835\fnil XPFortunaCD;}{\f2999\fnil eWorld Tight;}{\f4950\fnil TTYFont;}{\f7715\fnil XPFortuna-XB;}{\f9840\fnil Espy Sans;}{\f9842\fnil Espy Sans Bold;}{\f10840\fnil Klang MT;}{\f10890\fnil Script MT Bold;}{\f10897\fnil Old English Text MT;}{\f10909\fnil New Berolina MT;}{\f10957\fnil Bodoni MT Ultra Bold;}{\f10967\fnil Arial MT Condensed Light;}{\f14811\fnil Helvetica Compressed;}{\f14974\fnil Helvetica Black;}{\f15011\fnil Gill Sans Condensed Bold;}{\f32525\fnil VT100;}}{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\stylesheet{\s242 \sbasedon0\snext0 page number;}{\s243\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640 \sbasedon0\snext243 footer;}{\s244\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640 \sbasedon0\snext244 header;}{\sbasedon222\snext0 Normal;}}{\info{\title Roadmap}{\subject Mops Docs}{\author Craig Treleaven}{\*\verscomm Converted by John Robinson}}\margr1440\widowctrl\ftnbj\ftnrestart \sectd \pgnrestart\linemod0\linex0\cols1\colsx0\endnhere\titlepg {\header \pard\plain \li200\tqr\tx9000 {\f21 Road Map\tab }{\f21 \chpgn }{\f21 \par }\pard \li200\tx7200\tx9599 {\f3\fs18 \par \par }}{\footer \pard\plain \li200\tx7200\tx9599 {\f21 \par }}{\headerf \pard\plain \li200\tx7200\tx9599 {\f21 \par \par \par }\pard \li200\tx7200\tx9599 {\f3\fs18 \par }}\pard\plain \qr\li200\brdrt\brdrdb \tx6000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }\pard \qr\fi990\li5760\tx6000\tx9599 {\f20\fs36 A Road Map to the Mops Manual\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx6000\tx9599 {\f20 \par \par \par \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx6000\tx9599 {\f20 Before you dive into Mops, it will be most helpful if you have an overview of the organization of this rather lengthy manual.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx6000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx6000\tx9599 {\f20 Mops was designed as both a serious Macintosh development language and a language that beginning, casual programmers can learn to access the powers of the Mac.  This manual addresses both audiences, and some in between.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx6000\tx9599 {\f20 \par The manual is divided into the following major parts:\par \par \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx1400\tx2600\tx4000\tx5500\tx9599 {\f20 \tab Introduction and Tutorial\par \tab PART II.  \tab Mops General Reference\par \tab PART III. \tab Predefined Classes\par \tab PART IV.\tab Assembler\par \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\b\f20 \par }{\b\f20\ul Introduction and Tutorial}{\f20 \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 The Introduction is section is for everyone, regardless of expertise.  It should be the first section of the manual you study.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 We have devoted a large section of the Mops Manual to a 21-lesson tutorial, which will lead the beginner\emdash even someone who has never programmed a computer before\emdash and more experienced programmers through the essential elements of Mops.  We recommend that every Mops user, regardless of expertise, work through the Tutorial.  Even if you think parts of Mops resemble a language you already know, there will be significant differences that will be reinforced in the Tutorial.  Plan to spend ten to twelve separate sessions over several days with the lessons in the tutorial.  Mops is based on Forth, and if you have some familiarity with that language, it will certainly help.  Mops adds the power of the Object Oriented paradigm to traditional Forth, as well as other very useful tools.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }{\b\f20\ul PART II.  Mops General Reference}{\f20\ul   \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 Six chapters in this Part provide numerous details about Mops, including considerable expansion on topics touched on in the Tutorial.  Read this part only after going through the Tutorial.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }{\b\f20\ul PART III.  Predefined Classes}{\f20\ul \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 This part of the manual will become one of the most used reference sections once you begin writing Mops programs.  It contains details about the parts of the Mops language that have already been written for you to help you communicate your program ideas to the Macintosh's unique way of doing things.  Each chapter is devoted to a category of predefined classes, and begins with a general discussion about the class.  You should be familiar with the content of Part III before writing programs.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par \par }{\b\f20\ul PART IV.  Assembler}{\f20 \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 This describes the Mops 68000 assembler.  We also now have a PowerPC assember, but there's no manual chapter for it yet.  Note that because assembly code isn't portable between 680x0 Macs and Power Macs, you should really only bother with assembly code if you have some very low-level machine-specific things to do.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 Additionally, the Mops package contains many files which comprise the source code for the whole of Mops.  These files are actually further documentation for you.  You will get instructions in the Tutorial about how to print these files and organize them for ready reference.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par \par \par }\pard \qj\li200\keepn\tx4000\tx9599 {\b\f20 CONVENTIONS USED IN THIS MANUAL\par }{\f20 \par We use a couple of conventions throughout this manual that you should be aware of.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 In the Tutorial, we present many examples of things you should type into the computer.  To differentiate the characters you type from the characters that the computer generates on the screen, we }{\b\f20 boldface}{\f20  those char\-acters you type.  The computer's responses are printed in regular type.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 In both the Tutorial and the chapters in Part II, whenever we introduce a new Mops term, or intend for you to pay special attention to the terminology, we }{\f20\ul underline}{\f20  the key words.  When you see underlined words and phrases, it means that we are trying to acquaint you with a new term or re-emphasize a term or concept already mentioned.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 You will also find many cases in the manual and in the Mops source code of Mops words being capitalized in what may seem odd places, such as in the middle of a word like bArray.  While this style of capitalization is common among experienced programmers for the sake of ease of reading, rest assured that you won't have to master any scheme of capitalization in learning Mops.  Mops, itself, is }{\f20\ul case}{\f20  }{\f20\ul insensitive}{\f20 , which means that you can type a word in all lower case, all upper case, or any combination thereof, and Mops will recog\-nize it as the same word.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\b\f20 Special note to experienced Forth and Smalltalk programmers:}{\f20   Mops is based on Forth, and its object-oriented features owe a lot to Smalltalk.  Experienced programmers in either Smalltalk or Forth should take care not to jump to any conclusions regarding Mops's behavior on the basis of previous experience, and to read carefully through the Tutorial.\par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }\pard \qc\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \bullet \~\~\bullet \~\~\bullet \par }\pard \qj\li200\tx4000\tx9599 {\f20 \par }}